[music]
China and the US are locked in a race
over AI and President Trump says the US
is ahead.
>> China and other countries are racing to
catch up to America having to do with AI
and we're not going to let him do it.
>> But winning the AI race isn't going to
be easy. The US lags behind China on
electricity generation and earlier this
year was shaken by the advancements of
Chinese AI firm Deepseek. Today I'm
joined by the man the president has
chosen to lead the government over these
hurdles, Michael Katzios. Michael worked
for PayPal founder Peter Teal and became
chief technology officer in Trump's
first administration. He spent four
years working at the AI startup Scale
AI. And earlier this year, he returned
to government as the head of the Office
of Science and Technology Policy. the
agency in charge of the nation's tech
strategy.
Michael and I are going to talk about
everything from chips to chat bots
[music] and his thoughts on the role the
government should play in AI development
and innovation
from the Wall Street Journal's [music]
Tech Live event. Welcome to this live
taping of the Journal, our show about
money, business, and power. I'm Jessica
Mendoza. Coming up on the show, how the
US plans to win the AI race.
>> Michael, thank you so much for joining
us today.
>> Thank you so much for having me. I wish
I could uh be there in person.
>> I know it's unfortunate that you
couldn't join us in person. Um and just
for everyone's knowledge, this is
because of the government shutdown which
is now in its fifth week. Um I wanted to
ask besides impacting business travel,
how is this affecting how's the shutdown
affecting your work at the OSTP?
>> I think generally speaking, we are full
steam ahead on on executing on our AI
action plan and driving the president's
agenda forward. Um, obviously it would
have been great if we could have kept
the government open and uh and hopefully
the Democrats can uh can get their act
together and uh and pass a CR very soon.
But for us it's uh it's full steam
ahead.
>> Well, I think regardless of who you feel
is to blame, I think we're all hoping
that the shutdown ends soon. Isn't that
right? Um but you mentioned the AI
action plan which the administration
released this summer and in it you wrote
that America is going to win the AI race
quote just like we won the space race.
Now, winning the space race, you know,
we all know what that looks like. It was
getting the first man to walk on the
moon. What does winning the AI race look
like?
>> For us, I think winning this the AI race
uh generally is focused on adoption.
This question of how the American tech
stack can be the dominant technology
stack adopted around the world. And in
order to do that, um, we lay out sort of
a three-prong strategy to make that a
reality. The first big thing we have to
do is make sure that we lead on
innovation. Meaning that the US has to
be the home where the next great AI
discoveries happen. And we need a
regulatory system that can allow our
greatest AI technology companies and our
AI innovators to actually deploy those
technologies. Now married with all that
innovation, you have to have the
infrastructure to drive an AI
revolution. And that means we need the
power and we need the data centers in
order to do all that. And lots of work
can be done um and get into that on on
how to make that a reality. And the
third, which ties to this global
adoption question, is all about
diplomacy. It's how do we make sure that
we in the US are proactively exporting
our great American technologies to all
these countries around the world that
want to use this tech. Every tech leader
that I talk to, no matter where I travel
around the world, they want their
countries and they want their people to
realize the benefits of artificial
intelligence. And right now, the US is
so lucky. We have the best chips. We
have the best applications. We have the
best models. we should be getting it
getting those out in the hands of all
these different countries and all these
different people that want to get the
benefits of AI. So that's generally how
we view our strategy and we think that
if you follow that um we're ultimately
going to have widespread adoption of
American tech and that that's what
winning looks like.
>> Still a little bit harder to picture
than walking on the moon, but I see what
you're saying. I I'm curious though, you
mentioned adoption. What about the
government adopting AI? Is that part of
the vision? Where are we at on that?
>> It it is. You know, I I will say I am uh
now in my second stint in government and
as much as I as I am excited about
government adoption, I will say it never
is at the pace that that you see in the
private sector and you never should
expect the government to be um an early
adopter. That being said, I think a lot
of efforts are underway under, you know,
under the plan to get the federal
government up and running. There's lots
of cool projects going on at various
various agencies. There's great work at
the VA being underway in order to use AI
and places for medical diagnosis and and
tools for medical practitioners to help
the VA. So, I think there's lots of
opportunities out there and I think all
of our secretaries and all of our
agencies are super enthusiastic about
about finding ways to do adoption.
>> I want to talk about China. Um, you were
President Trump's chief technology
officer in his first term and you
mentioned, you know, the US has the best
technology. Now, for years, the approach
to competing with Chinese tech has been
to try to keep the best of US technology
out of China, including powerful AI
chips. How effective was that approach?
>> You know, [clears throat] generally
speaking, I think if you look at the
totality of the US chips and what
percentage are actually exported, it's
quite small. It's just the very high-end
chips. And that's something that the
president reaffirmed when we were on our
trip to to Asia just last week. And so
that those chips were not on the table
for for the Chinese now. Um, and I think
that that's really important. And I
think for us, we want to make sure that
the best chips that we have here in the
United States are available to our
innovators and available to our
companies in order to build the next
great AI solutions.
>> Yeah, I'm glad you mentioned that
meeting with uh between President Trump
and uh President Xiinping because uh the
Wall Street Journal reported that uh
during that meeting, the president was
planning to talk to she about greater
access for Nvidia to the Chinese market.
We know that the administration this
summer allowed Nvidia to sell its less
advanced a H20 chips to China. Uh but
that officials ahead of that meeting
were concerned that this would boost
China's AI capabilities. So I'd love to
hear you talk more about that where you
stand on balancing exporting US AI tech
and these national security concerns.
Yeah, I think if we bracket China for a
second and focus on the broader AI
export program, the key there is to get
our technology out in the hands of those
adopters. And for us, I think you kind
of we have to view the world in a couple
of different buckets. I think China is a
different case given their artificial
intelligence ambitions themselves. And
that's why you see most the export
control rules singularly focused on on
China as a as a country. Um, outside of
that, I think our general posture is we
want to get the world using our best
chips.
>> So, there's no concern or there's you're
not worried at all like if we have all
of these chips out in the world that it
wouldn't make its way to China anyway.
>> Um, well, if as part of the ability to
export them, I think the as part of your
license to be able to have them, there
would there are um restrictions on what
you could ultimately do with them. And
if you sort of break the rules and
ultimately diffuse those to places that
that you're not allowed to, um, then you
wouldn't be able to to get any chips
going forward. So, I think there's
there's a lot of incentive for you to
follow the rules.
>> Another important factor in winning the
AI race is public receptiveness. Um, and
I found this really interesting.
Stanford University came out with a
report recently that found that 83% of
Chinese believe that AI powered products
and services are more beneficial than
harmful and in the US Americans it's
39%.
What do you say to Americans who are
skeptical of AI?
>> Um to me I always like to talk about the
great benefits this technology can bring
to changing the lives of American people
for the better. Um, I think examples
that I think really can be impactful are
particularly in the medical space and
it's ones that a lot of Americans can
resonate with. But at the same time, I
think we have to be very cognizant
understanding that people are skeptical
of this technology, especially when it
comes to America's youth. And I think
that's a priority that we've taken as a
White House. The president signed
executive order around AI and education.
And the one thing that we always talk
about and and the first lady is a big
advocate for is actually teaching and
educating young Americans about AI.
Having them better understand what the
limitations of these technologies are,
where it's useful, where it's not
useful, where you should be using it,
where you shouldn't be using it, what's
the best way to use it. And I think for
us, the more education, the better that
we can do in teaching our students in K
through 12 how to leverage this
technology, the better off we'll be as a
country going forward. We also know that
when it comes to AI safety, especially
for minors, there's already some cases
where, you know, interactions with chat
bots have led to teens taking their own
lives. Um, and I think last week there
was a bipartisan bill that was
introduced in the Senate that would ban
AI chat bots for minors, for example,
and it would introduce criminal
penalties for AI companies that design
chat bots that encourage suicide or
discuss sexually explicit content. Would
that be a bill that you would support?
Yeah, I'm not familiar with that piece
of legislation, but I think broadly
speaking, as I said earlier, I think I'm
heartened to know that and to to observe
that sort of the children's safety
around AI is something that is truly
bipartisan. We saw it with the Take It
Down Act that the first lady supported
and we see it continually in both um in
both chambers [clears throat] of
Congress where new legislation continues
to be introduced in this area. I'm a new
father. I take this stuff very seriously
and I think it's critically important
that as we think about regulation of AI
that one place that we can all agree on
is we have to look carefully at how it
affects our youth and that's something
that the White House is behind that the
first lady's behind and and that we've
already signed legislation into.
>> Well, congratulations on being a new
dad. Um how do you expect how do you
anticipate talking to your kids? I know
it's going to be a while, but how do you
anticipate talking to your kids about
this kind of technology? What do you say
to your friends?
>> Oh, I don't know. My my wife and I go
back and forth on this all the time. I
mean, it it's so funny because I think
when I when I first, you know, met my
wife just a few years ago was when, you
know, the first Chad GPT came out, you
know, and we were sitting there playing
on it and kind of doing silly games on
it, asking silly questions. And then and
then over time now it's become better
and better and better and you you could
and I think the other thing that we've
all also observed together is the
transformation it's had in education.
You know, if you remember when it first
came out, universities were trying to
ban it. High schools were trying to stop
kids from using it. And just in a few
short years, it's become abundantly
clear that that definitely is not the
right path forward. And that one way or
another, students are going to be using
this, adults are going to be using this.
It is a part of our life. So, I think
it's it's changing so quickly daytoday.
Uh, you know, I don't I don't quite know
how it's going to affect my son, but um
but I do know it's uh it's going to be a
big part of his life. You can ask
chatgpt or whatever version it'll be by
that point what you [laughter] should be
doing.
>> Exactly. I'll ask it tonight. We'll see
what it says.
>> Um but just just to sort of close the
loop on this, what do you think the role
of government should be when it comes to
AI regulation if any?
>> Yeah. The the government has a very
important role and what we have
advocated for and I've advocated for for
years even in the first Trump
administration is the best approach to
AI regulation is for it to be use case
and sector specific. And what we mean by
that is because AI is so ubiquitous, it
is going to be in every technology out
there. Here are some examples. There are
AI powered medical diagnostics. There
are drones. There are self-driving cars.
And all those examples I just gave you.
There are already regulatory agencies
that exist that regulate those
technologies. The FDA regulates medical
diagnostics whether or not they have AI
in them or not. And Nitsa, for example,
regulates safety of vehicles whether or
not they're autonomous or not. The FAA
regulates air travel, whether it's
autonomous drone or not. And in those
cases, I think I think the best path
forward is for those regulatory agencies
that already have jurisdiction over
particular type of technology or action.
Those are the ones that should just
continue to expand or mold the way that
they think about regulation when this
new this new technology is introduced.
>> I understand what you were saying. you
know, the the agency that regulates
vehicles and can can also do that for
automated vehicles, but isn't there
still a bit of a learning curve? I mean,
as you were saying earlier, this
technology is moving so quickly. How how
do you know how how are these agencies
expected to catch up given everything
that they're already doing?
>> Yeah, I I I agree that um this
technology is moving quickly. Uh I do
have faith in our regulatory agencies to
kind of to do this. Um, I observed in
the first Trump administration that the
FDA in I think it was 2018 or 2019
approved the first AI AI powered medical
diagnostic in history and they've
continued to approve a lot more in the
time being. I think these are these are
professionals. They know their domain
very well and we should have confidence
in their ability to kind of mold. That
being said, I continue to to to
encourage these agencies to look for and
hire experts that are able to understand
sort of the new nuances of how how AI
affects their technology and it's a
constant challenge in the government
like we need more better smarter people
to come in and work on these issues
particularly in areas where the
technology is moving. It's interesting
that you say that we would want to see
more hiring uh of the best and the
brightest to help with this given the
fact that thousands of tens of thousands
of federal workers have just been cut.
So, how do you square that?
>> I think those are those are very
different things. Uh I think cutting
personnel at a federal agency that uh
that may not necessarily be necessary or
or important for a particular mission I
think is is very different than trying
to hire experts that can help in a in a
particular domain of regulation. And I
think what we've been doing as an
administration very tactically is to try
to find and identify kind of what are
the key missions and drivers of
particular agencies and make sure that
we have human capital allocated to the
highest impact areas that we can deliver
on the statutory mandate of those
individual agencies.
>> Coming up, is the US government worried
about an AI bubble?
I want to take one more step back. Uh
one of and going back to this idea of
the AI the US winning the AI race a key
part of that is power generation and we
know that again China has the edge when
it comes to electricity generation. Um,
OpenAI pointed out that China added
hundreds more gigawatts of power last
year compared to the US and you've said
the answer to that is nuclear power. Um,
how quickly, practically speaking, can
the US accelerate this effort and and
catch up?
>> Well, I I have been a a nuclear energy
uh uh advocate for for many many years.
My hope is as quickly as possible. There
was announcement actually made by the um
Department of War just last month. um
they believe that they'll be able to
field an a uh an SMR by 2028 that
they're going to put on a nuclear base.
Um we're seeing timelines where you
could actually see sort of Americans
connected to new nuclear power sort of
at the beginning of the next the next
decade. Um and I think in the meantime
we're doing everything we can to sort of
bridge bridge the gap there with as much
as we possibly can on uh on on on other
sources of fuel as well. Uh, one
question that, um, honestly I get asked
a lot by our listeners on the journal
podcast, uh, people are very interested
in AI, but are you worried about an AI
bubble?
>> Um, I I am not at the moment. I am, um,
excited that this technology is having
such a tremendous impact on our economy,
on our sort of national power, um, our
ability to project power around the
world. And I think the impact that it's
ultimately going to have on American
businesses and and consumers. Um, and I
think what's most exciting to me about
where we are in this cycle is we're
still pretty early. I mean, I, you know,
I joined the administration from a from
a a private sector AI company. I was
spending a lot of time trying to help
um, governments and and help um, a lot
of folks in industry um, adopt AI and
build it into their workflows. And I
will say, you know, even kind of a year
ago, you know, adoption is hard. It's
really easy. It It's not It's not as
simple as just signing up for an API for
for one of our great model builders and
suddenly you're gonna have a miracle.
Like it takes effort. It takes a lot of
work. Um but once you're once you get it
up and running, I think it could be it
can be a huge a huge boon for for
governments and for um and for the
private sector. So to me, I think we are
we are barely sort of seeing the
benefits of it. So, I think, you know,
if you try to map that to kind of where
the projection is of of of energy
consumption and chip demand and and all
these big announcements you're seeing
from our our big model builders, it all
kind of generally maps my head. You're
going to see the the adoption uptick um
by people, but you know, much more than
just individual consumers, and that's
going to pair well with the the
projected energy and and chip demand.
>> Okay. So, just just to be clear, it's a
no from you, not concerned about an AI
bubble.
>> I am I am excited about where the
industry is going. Uh and I and I think
and I'm very confident in uh the capital
markets in the United States more so
than anyone else to allocate capital to
the right places.
>> Okay.
[laughter]
>> All right. Well, we're running out of
time here, but I did want to ask you one
last question, Michael. Uh people might
not know you're a marathon runner. Um if
this AI race is a marathon, what mile
are we on?
>> Oh, that's a good one. Uh
>> I don't know. Maybe we we just passed
the 5K mark. We got a long way to go.
>> Got a long way. Well, thank you so much,
Michael Katzios, uh, director of the
office of science, technology policy,
everybody.
>> Thank you.
>> That's all for today, Wednesday,
November 5th. The Journal is a
co-production of Spotify and the Wall
Street Journal. Additional reporting in
this episode [music] by Amid Ramar.
Thanks for listening. See you tomorrow.